1. ifconfig(interface configuration):
        ifconfig helps to display or configure network interfaces.
        Allows to view status, assign ip addresses etc.
        If simply typed in, shows all current network interfaces in your system.
        Alternatvely, use ip command.

2. netstat(network statistics):
        Used to display network connections, routing table, interface statistics etc.
        Replaced by ss command.

3. ping:
        Useed to check network connectivity between host and machine.
        Sends echo packets and waits for response.
        ipv6 uses ping6.
    
4. ftp:
        File Transfer Protocol.
        Used to transfer files from a local machine to remote server over a network.
        Both upload and download.

5. telnet: 
        Used to remotely access and manage devices over a network.
        Insecure(SSH is used instead).

6. traceroute:
        Helps to trace path of packets from our device to remote host.
        Works by decreasing TTL till zero or the packet reaches the destination to trace immediate hops.

7. whois: 
        Used to query ip address, owner etc.
        Helps in troubleshooting.

8. ip addr: 
        Part of ip command set.
        Displays ip addresses assigned to network interfaces of the system.

9. nslookup(Name Server Lookup): 
        For querying DNS to get ip address mapping and other records.
        allows to see ip address to domain name mapping.

10. hostname:
        Allows to see or set hostname of the system ie, name of computer in the network.
        
11. cat /etc/hosts: 
        Also used to map ip address to domain name.
        The /etc/hosts file is used.
        Used to map local domain names and static ip resolutions.

12. cat /etc/resolv.conf:
        /etc/resolv.conf file is used.
        Contains infromation of DNS servers that are used by the system to look up io addresses.

13. cat /etc/nsswitch.conf:
        /etc/nsswitch.conf file is used.
        Controls behavior of system databases and their resolution.

14. arp:
        Address Resolution Protocol.
        Used to view arp cache.